docs/source/best-practices.mdx, before:

---
title: Best Practices
subtitle: Guidelines for using Apollo MCP Server
---

<ExperimentalFeature>

This feature is [experimental](/graphos/resources/feature-launch-stages#experimental). Your questions and feedback are highly valued—don't hesitate to get in touch with your Apollo contact or post in the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41).

</ExperimentalFeature>

## Use contract variants to control AI access to graphs

GraphOS [contract variants](/graphos/platform/schema-management/delivery/contracts/overview) let you deliver different subsets of your graph to different consumers.

When running Apollo MCP Server with GraphOS, use contract variants whenever possible. This allows you to control which parts of your graph are accessible to AI by exposing only the necessary subsets.

In particular, we strongly recommend contract variants when using:
- [GraphOS-managed persisted queries](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#from-graphos-managed-persisted-queries)
- [Introspection](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#from-schema-introspection)

## Send client name header when using persisted queries

If you register a persisted query with a specific client name instead of `null`, you must configure the MCP Server to send the necessary header indicating the client name to the router. 

Use the `--header` option when running the MCP Server to pass the header to the router. The default name of the header expected by the router is `apollographql-client-name`. To use a different header name, configure `telemetry.apollo.client_name_header` in router YAML configuration.

Commit message:

docs: document why we don't support token passthrough

docs/source/best-practices.mdx, after:

---
title: Best Practices
subtitle: Guidelines for using Apollo MCP Server
---

<ExperimentalFeature>

This feature is [experimental](/graphos/resources/feature-launch-stages#experimental). Your questions and feedback are highly valued—don't hesitate to get in touch with your Apollo contact or post in the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41).

</ExperimentalFeature>

## Use contract variants to control AI access to graphs

GraphOS [contract variants](/graphos/platform/schema-management/delivery/contracts/overview) let you deliver different subsets of your graph to different consumers.

When running Apollo MCP Server with GraphOS, use contract variants whenever possible. This allows you to control which parts of your graph are accessible to AI by exposing only the necessary subsets.

In particular, we strongly recommend contract variants when using:

- [GraphOS-managed persisted queries](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#from-graphos-managed-persisted-queries)
- [Introspection](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#from-schema-introspection)

## Send client name header when using persisted queries

If you register a persisted query with a specific client name instead of `null`, you must configure the MCP Server to send the necessary header indicating the client name to the router.

Use the `--header` option when running the MCP Server to pass the header to the router. The default name of the header expected by the router is `apollographql-client-name`. To use a different header name, configure `telemetry.apollo.client_name_header` in router YAML configuration.

## Avoid token passthrough for authentication

Token passthrough refers to forwarding `Authorization` headers from MCP clients through MCP Servers to downstream APIs.
While this might seem helpful in some multi-tenant setups, the Apollo MCP Server does not support this pattern by design, and we strongly discourage it.

According to the [MCP security best practices](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/draft/basic/security_best_practices#token-passthrough) and the [MCP authorization specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization#access-token-privilege-restriction), this pattern introduces serious security risks:

- **Audience confusion**: If the MCP Server accepts tokens not intended for it, it can violate OAuth’s trust boundaries.
- **Confused deputy problem**: If an unvalidated token is passed downstream, a downstream API may incorrectly trust it as though it were validated by the MCP Server.

To maintain clear trust boundaries, MCP servers must only accept tokens explicitly issued for themselves and must act as independent OAuth clients when calling upstream services.
Forwarding client tokens downstream is not allowed.

Our team is actively working on a robust authentication mechanism that follows OAuth 2.1 best practices and aligns with the MCP authorization model.
Our goal is to deliver a secure, standards-compliant, and maintainable solution.
