docs/source/command-reference.mdx, before:

---
title: Command Reference
subtitle: ""
description: Reference guide of options for running Apollo MCP Server.
---

<ExperimentalFeature>

This feature is [experimental](/graphos/resources/feature-launch-stages#experimental). Your questions and feedback are highly valued—don't hesitate to get in touch with your Apollo contact or post in the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41).

</ExperimentalFeature>

## Installation Methods

### Download container image

A container is built for the Apollo MCP Server with every release at `ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server`.

To download the **latest release** Docker container of Apollo MCP Server:

```bash
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:latest
```

To download a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:v0.6.1
```

To download a specific version of Apollo MCP Server that is a release candidate:

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number and the `-rc` suffix
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:v0.6.1-rc.1
```

<Note>

The container sets a few defaults for ease of use:

- **Working Directory is `/data`**: Make sure to mount static schemas / operations to this location
  using the volume flag when running [(`-v` / `--version`)](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/container/run/#volume).
- **HTTP Streamable Transport on port 5000**: Make sure to export container port 5000 for HTTP Streamable connections to
  the MCP server using the port flag when running [(`-p` / `--port`)](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/container/run/#publish)

</Note>

### Apollo Runtime Container

The Apollo Runtime Container runs both the MCP Server and the [Apollo Router](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/routing) in a single container. It's useful for local development, testing, and production deployments.

Learn more about deploying and configuring this container in the [Runtime Container repository](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-runtime).

### Linux / MacOS installer

To install or upgrade to the **latest release** of Apollo MCP Server:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
curl -sSL https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/nix/latest | sh
```

To install or upgrade to a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
curl -sSL https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/nix/v0.6.1 | sh
```

If your machine doesn't have the `curl` command, you can get the latest version from the [`curl` downloads page](https://curl.se/download.html).

### Windows PowerShell installer

To install or upgrade to the **latest release** of Apollo MCP Server:

```bash
iwr 'https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/win/latest' | iex
```

To install or upgrade to a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
iwr 'https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/win/v0.6.1' | iex
```

## Usage

Configure the Apollo MCP server with a configuration file. The path to this file is the only argument.

```sh showLineNumbers=false
apollo-mcp-server [OPTIONS] <PATH/TO/CONFIG/FILE>
```

### CLI options

| Option          | Description               |
| :-------------- | :------------------------ |
| `-h, --help`    | Print help information    |
| `-V, --version` | Print version information |

### Config options

All fields are optional and have sensible default values.

| Option           | Type                  | Default                  | Description                                                   |
| :--------------- | :-------------------- | :----------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `custom_scalars` | `FilePath`            |                          | Path to a custom scalar map                                   |
| `endpoint`       | `URL`                 | `http://localhost:4000/` | The target GraphQL endpoint                                   |
| `graphos`        | `GraphOS`             |                          | Apollo-specific credential overrides                          |
| `headers`        | `Map<string, string>` | `{}`                     | List of hard-coded headers to include in all GraphQL requests |
| `introspection`  | `Introspection`       |                          | Introspection configuration                                   |
| `logging`        | `Logging`             |                          | Logging configuration                                         |
| `operations`     | `OperationSource`     |                          | Operations configuration                                      |
| `overrides`      | `Overrides`           |                          | Overrides for server behavior                                 |
| `schema`         | `SchemaSource`        |                          | Schema configuration                                          |
| `transport`      | `Transport`           |                          | The type of server transport to use                           |


#### GraphOS configuration

These fields are under the top-level `graphos` key.

| Option                    | Type     | Default | Description                                                                                                     |
| :------------------------ | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apollo_key`              | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS key. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_KEY` environment variable                    |
| `apollo_graph_ref`        | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS graph reference. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` environment variable  |
| `apollo_registry_url`     | `URL`    |         | The URL to use for Apollo's registry                                                                            |
| `apollo_uplink_endpoints` | `URL`    |         | List of uplink URL overrides. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_UPLINK_ENDPOINTS` environment variable |


#### Introspection configuration

These fields are under the top-level `introspection` key.

| Option               | Type     | Default | Description                                                           |
| :------------------- | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `execute`            | `object` |         | Execution configuration for introspection                             |
| `execute.enabled`    | `bool`   | `false` | Enable introspection for execution                                    |
| `introspect`         | `object` |         | Introspection configuration for allowing clients to run introspection |
| `introspect.enabled` | `bool`   | `false` | Enable introspection requests                                         |
| `search`             | `object` |         | Search tool configuration                                             |
| `search.enabled`     | `bool`   | `false` | Enable search tool                                                    |


#### Logging configuration

These fields are under the top-level `logging` key.

| Option  | Type                                                | Default  | Description                     |
| :------ | :-------------------------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------ |
| `level` | `oneOf ["trace", "debug", "info", "warn", "error"]` | `"info"` | The minimum log level to record |


#### Operation source configuration

These fields are under the top-level `operations` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"infer"`.

| Source             | Option   | Type             | Default | Description                                                                                                                                       |
| :----------------- | :------- | :--------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| GraphOS Collection | `source` | `"collection"`   |         | Load operations from a GraphOS collection                                                                                                         |
| GraphOS Collection | `id`     | `string`         |         | The collection ID to use in GraphOS. Use `default` for the default collection. [Learn more](/apollo-mcp-server/guides/#from-operation-collection) |
| Introspection      | `source` | `"introspect"`   |         | Load operations by introspecting the schema. Note: You must enable introspection to use this source                                               |
| Local              | `source` | `"local"`        |         | Load operations from local GraphQL files or directories                                                                                           |
| Local              | `paths`  | `List<FilePath>` |         | Paths to GraphQL files or directories to search                                                                                                   |
| Manifest           | `source` | `"manifest"`     |         | Load operations from a persisted queries manifest file                                                                                            |
| Manifest           | `path`   | `FilePath`       |         | The path to the persisted query manifest                                                                                                          |
| Uplink             | `source` | `"uplink"`       |         | Load operations from an uplink manifest. Note: This source requires an Apollo key and graph reference                                             |
| Infer              | `source` | `"infer"`        | *       | Infer where to load operations based on other configuration options.                                                                              |


#### Overrides configuration

These fields are under the top-level `overrides` key.

| Option                       | Type                                | Default  | Description                                                                                                                      |
| :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `disable_type_description`   | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable type descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                        |
| `disable_schema_description` | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable schema descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                      |
| `enable_explorer`            | `bool`                              | `false`  | Expose a tool that returns the URL to open a GraphQL operation in Apollo Explorer. Note: This requires a GraphOS graph reference |
| `mutation_mode`              | `oneOf ["none", "explicit", "all"]` | `"none"` | Defines the mutation access level for the MCP server                                                                             |


#### Schema source configuration

These fields are under the top-level `schema` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"uplink"`.

| Source | Option   | Type       | Default | Description                                                                         |
| :----- | :------- | :--------- | :------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Local  | `source` | `"local"`  |         | Load schema from local file                                                         |
| Local  | `path`   | `FilePath` |         | Path to the GraphQL schema                                                          |
| Uplink | `source` | `"uplink"` | *       | Fetch the schema from uplink. Note: This requires an Apollo key and graph reference |


#### Transport configuration

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `type` key.
The default value for `type` is `"stdio"`.

| Type           | Option    | Type                | Default     | Description                                                                                                                   |
| :------------- | :-------- | :------------------ | :---------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| stdio          | `type`    | `"stdio"`           | *           | Use standard IO for communication between the server and client                                                               |
| SSE            | `type`    | `"sse"`             |             | Host the MCP server on the supplied configuration, using SSE for communication. Note: Deprecated in favor of `StreamableHTTP` |
| SSE            | `address` | `IpAddr`            | `127.0.0.1` | The IP address to bind to                                                                                                     |
| SSE            | `port`    | `u16`               | `5000`      | The port to bind to                                                                                                           |
| StreamableHTTP | `type`    | `"streamable_http"` |             | Host the MCP server on the configuration, using streamable HTTP messages.                                                     |
| StreamableHTTP | `address` | `IpAddr`            | `127.0.0.1` | The IP address to bind to                                                                                                     |
| StreamableHTTP | `port`    | `u16`               | `5000`      | The port to bind to                                                                                                           |


### Mapping rover dev options

You can use the [`rover dev`](/rover/commands/dev) command of Rover CLI v0.32 or later to run an Apollo MCP Server instance for local development.

Running `rover dev --mcp` starts an MCP Server. Additional options, `--mcp*`, directly configure the MCP Server.

The mapping of `rover dev` options to MCP Server options:

| `rover dev` option              | Equivalent MCP Server option | Description                               |
| :------------------------------ | :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------------- |
| `--mcp-config <PATH/TO/CONFIG>` | `<PATH/TO/CONFIG>`           | Path to the MCP server configuration file |

Commit message:

docs: updatings docs for rover 0.35 and fixing some issues (#221)
* docs: updatings docs for rover 0.35 and fixing some issues

* docs: fixing rover dev cmd example

* docs: removing mcp-config reference

* docs: adjusting rover dev --mcp reference

* chore: fixing phrasing

* docs: fixing rover dev options table

* docs: removing table that is no longer needed

docs/source/command-reference.mdx, after:

---
title: Command Reference
subtitle: ""
description: Reference guide of options for running Apollo MCP Server.
---

<ExperimentalFeature>

This feature is [experimental](/graphos/resources/feature-launch-stages#experimental). Your questions and feedback are highly valued—don't hesitate to get in touch with your Apollo contact or post in the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41).

</ExperimentalFeature>

## Installation Methods

### Download container image

A container is built for the Apollo MCP Server with every release at `ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server`.

To download the **latest release** Docker container of Apollo MCP Server:

```bash
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:latest
```

To download a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:v0.6.1
```

To download a specific version of Apollo MCP Server that is a release candidate:

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number and the `-rc` suffix
docker image pull ghcr.io/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server:v0.6.1-rc.1
```

<Note>

The container sets a few defaults for ease of use:

- **Working Directory is `/data`**: Make sure to mount static schemas / operations to this location
  using the volume flag when running [(`-v` / `--volume`)](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/container/run/#volume).
- **HTTP Streamable Transport on port 5000**: Make sure to export container port 5000 for HTTP Streamable connections to
  the MCP server using the port flag when running [(`-p` / `--port`)](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/container/run/#publish)

</Note>

### Apollo Runtime Container

The Apollo Runtime Container runs both the MCP Server and the [Apollo Router](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/routing) in a single container. It's useful for local development, testing, and production deployments.

Learn more about deploying and configuring this container in the [Runtime Container repository](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-runtime).

### Linux / MacOS installer

To install or upgrade to the **latest release** of Apollo MCP Server:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
curl -sSL https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/nix/latest | sh
```

To install or upgrade to a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
curl -sSL https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/nix/v0.6.1 | sh
```

If your machine doesn't have the `curl` command, you can get the latest version from the [`curl` downloads page](https://curl.se/download.html).

### Windows PowerShell installer

To install or upgrade to the **latest release** of Apollo MCP Server:

```bash
iwr 'https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/win/latest' | iex
```

To install or upgrade to a **specific version** of Apollo MCP Server (recommended for CI environments to ensure predictable behavior):

```bash
# Note the `v` prefixing the version number
iwr 'https://mcp.apollo.dev/download/win/v0.6.1' | iex
```

## Usage

Configure the Apollo MCP server with a configuration file. The path to this file is the only argument.

```sh showLineNumbers=false
apollo-mcp-server [OPTIONS] <PATH/TO/CONFIG/FILE>
```

### CLI options

| Option          | Description               |
| :-------------- | :------------------------ |
| `-h, --help`    | Print help information    |
| `-V, --version` | Print version information |

### Config options

All fields are optional and have sensible default values.

| Option           | Type                  | Default                  | Description                                                   |
| :--------------- | :-------------------- | :----------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `custom_scalars` | `FilePath`            |                          | Path to a custom scalar map                                   |
| `endpoint`       | `URL`                 | `http://localhost:4000/` | The target GraphQL endpoint                                   |
| `graphos`        | `GraphOS`             |                          | Apollo-specific credential overrides                          |
| `headers`        | `Map<string, string>` | `{}`                     | List of hard-coded headers to include in all GraphQL requests |
| `introspection`  | `Introspection`       |                          | Introspection configuration                                   |
| `logging`        | `Logging`             |                          | Logging configuration                                         |
| `operations`     | `OperationSource`     |                          | Operations configuration                                      |
| `overrides`      | `Overrides`           |                          | Overrides for server behavior                                 |
| `schema`         | `SchemaSource`        |                          | Schema configuration                                          |
| `transport`      | `Transport`           |                          | The type of server transport to use                           |


#### GraphOS configuration

These fields are under the top-level `graphos` key.

| Option                    | Type     | Default | Description                                                                                                     |
| :------------------------ | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apollo_key`              | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS key. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_KEY` environment variable                    |
| `apollo_graph_ref`        | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS graph reference. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` environment variable  |
| `apollo_registry_url`     | `URL`    |         | The URL to use for Apollo's registry                                                                            |
| `apollo_uplink_endpoints` | `URL`    |         | List of uplink URL overrides. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_UPLINK_ENDPOINTS` environment variable |


#### Introspection configuration

These fields are under the top-level `introspection` key.

| Option               | Type     | Default | Description                                                           |
| :------------------- | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `execute`            | `object` |         | Execution configuration for introspection                             |
| `execute.enabled`    | `bool`   | `false` | Enable introspection for execution                                    |
| `introspect`         | `object` |         | Introspection configuration for allowing clients to run introspection |
| `introspect.enabled` | `bool`   | `false` | Enable introspection requests                                         |
| `search`             | `object` |         | Search tool configuration                                             |
| `search.enabled`     | `bool`   | `false` | Enable search tool                                                    |


#### Logging configuration

These fields are under the top-level `logging` key.

| Option  | Type                                                | Default  | Description                     |
| :------ | :-------------------------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------ |
| `level` | `oneOf ["trace", "debug", "info", "warn", "error"]` | `"info"` | The minimum log level to record |


#### Operation source configuration

These fields are under the top-level `operations` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"infer"`.

| Source             | Option   | Type             | Default | Description                                                                                                                                       |
| :----------------- | :------- | :--------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| GraphOS Collection | `source` | `"collection"`   |         | Load operations from a GraphOS collection                                                                                                         |
| GraphOS Collection | `id`     | `string`         |         | The collection ID to use in GraphOS. Use `default` for the default collection. [Learn more](/apollo-mcp-server/guides/#from-operation-collection) |
| Introspection      | `source` | `"introspect"`   |         | Load operations by introspecting the schema. Note: You must enable introspection to use this source                                               |
| Local              | `source` | `"local"`        |         | Load operations from local GraphQL files or directories                                                                                           |
| Local              | `paths`  | `List<FilePath>` |         | Paths to GraphQL files or directories to search                                                                                                   |
| Manifest           | `source` | `"manifest"`     |         | Load operations from a persisted queries manifest file                                                                                            |
| Manifest           | `path`   | `FilePath`       |         | The path to the persisted query manifest                                                                                                          |
| Uplink             | `source` | `"uplink"`       |         | Load operations from an uplink manifest. Note: This source requires an Apollo key and graph reference                                             |
| Infer              | `source` | `"infer"`        | *       | Infer where to load operations based on other configuration options.                                                                              |


#### Overrides configuration

These fields are under the top-level `overrides` key.

| Option                       | Type                                | Default  | Description                                                                                                                      |
| :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `disable_type_description`   | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable type descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                        |
| `disable_schema_description` | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable schema descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                      |
| `enable_explorer`            | `bool`                              | `false`  | Expose a tool that returns the URL to open a GraphQL operation in Apollo Explorer. Note: This requires a GraphOS graph reference |
| `mutation_mode`              | `oneOf ["none", "explicit", "all"]` | `"none"` | Defines the mutation access level for the MCP server                                                                             |


#### Schema source configuration

These fields are under the top-level `schema` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"uplink"`.

| Source | Option   | Type       | Default | Description                                                                         |
| :----- | :------- | :--------- | :------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Local  | `source` | `"local"`  |         | Load schema from local file                                                         |
| Local  | `path`   | `FilePath` |         | Path to the GraphQL schema                                                          |
| Uplink | `source` | `"uplink"` | *       | Fetch the schema from uplink. Note: This requires an Apollo key and graph reference |


#### Transport configuration

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `type` key.
The default value for `type` is `"stdio"`.

| Type           | Option    | Type                | Default     | Description                                                                                                                   |
| :------------- | :-------- | :------------------ | :---------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| stdio          | `type`    | `"stdio"`           | *           | Use standard IO for communication between the server and client                                                               |
| SSE            | `type`    | `"sse"`             |             | Host the MCP server on the supplied configuration, using SSE for communication. Note: Deprecated in favor of `StreamableHTTP` |
| SSE            | `address` | `IpAddr`            | `127.0.0.1` | The IP address to bind to                                                                                                     |
| SSE            | `port`    | `u16`               | `5000`      | The port to bind to                                                                                                           |
| StreamableHTTP | `type`    | `"streamable_http"` |             | Host the MCP server on the configuration, using streamable HTTP messages.                                                     |
| StreamableHTTP | `address` | `IpAddr`            | `127.0.0.1` | The IP address to bind to                                                                                                     |
| StreamableHTTP | `port`    | `u16`               | `5000`      | The port to bind to                                                                                                           |


### Mapping rover dev options

You can use the [`rover dev`](/rover/commands/dev) command of Rover CLI v0.32 or later to run an Apollo MCP Server instance for local development.

Running `rover dev --mcp` starts an MCP Server.  An optional configuration file path can be provided to configure the MCP server via `rover dev --mcp <PATH/TO/CONFIG>`.
