docs/source/config-file.mdx, before:

---
title: Config File Reference
redirectFrom:
  - /apollo-mcp-server/command-reference
---

### Example config file

The following example file sets your endpoint to `localhost:4001`, configures transport over Streamable HTTP, provides a GraphOS key and graph reference,
enables introspection, and provides two local MCP operations for the server to expose.

```yaml config.yaml
endpoint: http://localhost:4001/
transport:
  type: streamable_http
graphos:
  apollo_key: <YOUR_APOLLO_KEY>
  apollo_graph_ref: <YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF>
introspection:
  introspect:
    enabled: true
operations:
  source: local
  paths:
    - relative/path/to/your/operations/userDetails.graphql
    - relative/path/to/your/operations/listing.graphql
```

## Configuration options

All fields are optional.

| Option           | Type                  | Default                  | Description                                                      |
| :--------------- | :-------------------- | :----------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `custom_scalars` | `FilePath`            |                          | Path to a [custom scalar map](/apollo-mcp-server/custom-scalars) |
| `endpoint`       | `URL`                 | `http://localhost:4000/` | The target GraphQL endpoint                                      |
| `graphos`        | `GraphOS`             |                          | Apollo-specific credential overrides                             |
| `headers`        | `Map<string, string>` | `{}`                     | List of hard-coded headers to include in all GraphQL requests    |
| `health_check`   | `HealthCheck`         |                          | Health check configuration                                       |
| `introspection`  | `Introspection`       |                          | Introspection configuration                                      |
| `logging`        | `Logging`             |                          | Logging configuration                                            |
| `operations`     | `OperationSource`     |                          | Operations configuration                                         |
| `overrides`      | `Overrides`           |                          | Overrides for server behavior                                    |
| `schema`         | `SchemaSource`        |                          | Schema configuration                                             |
| `transport`      | `Transport`           |                          | The type of server transport to use                              |

### GraphOS

These fields are under the top-level `graphos` key and define your GraphOS graph credentials and endpoints.

| Option                    | Type     | Default | Description                                                                                                     |
| :------------------------ | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apollo_key`              | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS key. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_KEY` environment variable                    |
| `apollo_graph_ref`        | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS graph reference. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` environment variable  |
| `apollo_registry_url`     | `URL`    |         | The URL to use for Apollo's registry                                                                            |
| `apollo_uplink_endpoints` | `URL`    |         | List of uplink URL overrides. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_UPLINK_ENDPOINTS` environment variable |

### Health checks

These fields are under the top-level `health_check` key.

| Option                        | Type       | Default     | Description                                                                        |
| :---------------------------- | :--------- | :---------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `enabled`                     | `bool`     | `false`     | Enable health check endpoints                                                      |
| `path`                        | `string`   | `"/health"` | Custom health check endpoint path                                                  |
| `readiness`                   | `object`   |             | Readiness check configuration                                                      |
| `readiness.allowed`           | `number`   | `100`       | Maximum number of rejections allowed in a sampling interval before marking unready |
| `readiness.interval`          | `object`   |             | Readiness check interval configuration                                             |
| `readiness.interval.sampling` | `duration` | `"5s"`      | How often to check the rejection count                                             |
| `readiness.interval.unready`  | `duration` | `"10s"`     | How long to wait before recovering from unready state (default: 2 \* sampling)     |

<Note>

Health checks are only available when using the `streamable_http` transport. The health check feature is inspired by Apollo Router's health check implementation.

</Note>

### Introspection

These fields are under the top-level `introspection` key. Learn more about the MCP [introspection tools](/apollo-mcp-server/define-tools#introspection-tools).

| Option                      | Type     | Default    | Description                                                           |
| :-------------------------- | :------- | :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `execute`                   | `object` |            | Execution configuration for introspection                             |
| `execute.enabled`           | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable introspection for execution                                    |
| `introspect`                | `object` |            | Introspection configuration for allowing clients to run introspection |
| `introspect.enabled`        | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable introspection requests                                         |
| `introspect.minify`         | `bool`   | `false`    | Minify introspection results to reduce context window usage           |
| `search`                    | `object` |            | Search tool configuration                                             |
| `search.enabled`            | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable search tool                                                    |
| `search.index_memory_bytes` | `number` | `50000000` | Amount of memory used for indexing (in bytes)                         |
| `search.leaf_depth`         | `number` | `1`        | Depth of subtype information to include from matching types           |
| `search.minify`             | `bool`   | `false`    | Minify search results to reduce context window usage                  |
| `validate`                  | `object` |            | Validation tool configuration                                         |
| `validate.enabled`          | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable validation tool                                                |

### Logging

These fields are under the top-level `logging` key.

| Option     | Type                                                | Default    | Description                                                                       |
| :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------- | :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `level`    | `oneOf ["trace", "debug", "info", "warn", "error"]` | `"info"`   | The minimum log level to record                                                   |
| `path`     | `FilePath`                                          |            | An output file path for logging. If not provided logging outputs to stdio/stderr. |
| `rotation` | `oneOf ["minutely", "hourly", "daily", "never"]`    | `"hourly"` | The log file rotation interval (if file logging is used)                          |

### Operation source

These fields are under the top-level `operations` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"infer"`.

| Source             | Option   | Type             | Default | Description                                                                                                                                             |
| :----------------- | :------- | :--------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| GraphOS Collection | `source` | `"collection"`   |         | Load operations from a GraphOS collection                                                                                                               |
| GraphOS Collection | `id`     | `string`         |         | The collection ID to use in GraphOS. Use `default` for the default collection. [Learn more](/apollo-mcp-server/define-tools/#from-operation-collection) |
| Introspection      | `source` | `"introspect"`   |         | Load operations by introspecting the schema. Note: You must enable introspection to use this source                                                     |
| Local              | `source` | `"local"`        |         | Load operations from local GraphQL files or directories                                                                                                 |
| Local              | `paths`  | `List<FilePath>` |         | Paths to GraphQL files or directories to search. Note: These paths are relative to the location from which you are running Apollo MCP Server.           |
| Manifest           | `source` | `"manifest"`     |         | Load operations from a persisted queries manifest file                                                                                                  |
| Manifest           | `path`   | `FilePath`       |         | The path to the persisted query manifest                                                                                                                |
| Uplink             | `source` | `"uplink"`       |         | Load operations from an uplink manifest. Note: This source requires an Apollo key and graph reference                                                   |
| Infer              | `source` | `"infer"`        | \*      | Infer where to load operations based on other configuration options.                                                                                    |

### Overrides

These fields are under the top-level `overrides` key.

| Option                       | Type                                | Default  | Description                                                                                                                      |
| :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `disable_type_description`   | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable type descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                        |
| `disable_schema_description` | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable schema descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                      |
| `enable_explorer`            | `bool`                              | `false`  | Expose a tool that returns the URL to open a GraphQL operation in Apollo Explorer. Note: This requires a GraphOS graph reference |
| `mutation_mode`              | `oneOf ["none", "explicit", "all"]` | `"none"` | Defines the mutation access level for the MCP server                                                                             |

### Schema source

These fields are under the top-level `schema` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"uplink"`.

| Source | Option   | Type       | Default | Description                                                                         |
| :----- | :------- | :--------- | :------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Local  | `source` | `"local"`  |         | Load schema from local file                                                         |
| Local  | `path`   | `FilePath` |         | Path to the GraphQL schema                                                          |
| Uplink | `source` | `"uplink"` | \*      | Fetch the schema from uplink. Note: This requires an Apollo key and graph reference |

### Transport

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key, to configure running the MCP Server in different environments - stdio, Streamable HTTP or SSE (deprecated).

```
transport:
  type: stdio
```

The available fields depend on the value of the nested `type` key:

##### stdio (default)

| Option | Value     | Default Value | Description                                                     |
| :----- | :-------- | :------------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type` | `"stdio"` | \*            | Use standard IO for communication between the server and client |

##### Streamable HTTP

| Option    | Value                 | Value Type | Description                                                               |
| :-------- | :-------------------- | :--------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `type`    | `"streamable_http"`   |            | Host the MCP server on the configuration, using streamable HTTP messages. |
| `address` | `127.0.0.1` (default) | `IpAddr`   | The IP address to bind to                                                 |
| `port`    | `5000` (default)      | `u16`      | The port to bind to                                                       |

##### SSE (Deprecated, use StreamableHTTP)

| Option    | Value                 | Value Type | Description                                                                                                      |
| :-------- | :-------------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type`    | `"sse"`               |            | Host the MCP server on the supplied config, using SSE for communication. Deprecated in favor of `StreamableHTTP` |
| `address` | `127.0.0.1` (default) | `IpAddr`   | The IP address to bind to                                                                                        |
| `port`    | `5000` (default)      | `u16`      | The port to bind to                                                                                              |

### Auth

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key, nested under the `auth` key.

| Option                   | Type           | Default | Description                                                                                        |
| :----------------------- | :------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `servers`                | `List<URL>`    |         | List of upstream delegated OAuth servers (must support OIDC metadata discovery endpoint)           |
| `audiences`              | `List<string>` |         | List of accepted audiences from upstream signed JWTs                                               |
| `resource`               | `string`       |         | The externally available URL pointing to this MCP server. Can be `localhost` when testing locally. |
| `resource_documentation` | `string`       |         | Optional link to more documentation relating to this MCP server                                    |
| `scopes`                 | `List<string>` |         | List of queryable OAuth scopes from the upstream OAuth servers                                     |

Below is an example configuration using `StreamableHTTP` transport with authentication:

```yaml title="mcp.yaml"
transport:
  type: streamable_http
  auth:
    # List of upstream delegated OAuth servers
    # Note: These need to support the OIDC metadata discovery endpoint
    servers:
      - https://auth.example.com

    # List of accepted audiences from upstream signed JWTs
    # See: https://www.ory.sh/docs/hydra/guides/audiences
    audiences:
      - mcp.example.audience

    # The externally available URL pointing to this MCP server. Can be `localhost`
    # when testing locally.
    # Note: Subpaths must be preserved here as well. So append `/mcp` if using
    # Streamable HTTP or `/sse` is using SSE.
    resource: https://hosted.mcp.server/mcp

    # Optional link to more documentation relating to this MCP server.
    resource_documentation: https://info.mcp.server

    # List of queryable OAuth scopes from the upstream OAuth servers
    scopes:
      - read
      - mcp
      - profile
```

Commit message:

add back deleted description for config file

docs/source/config-file.mdx, after:

---
title: Config File Reference
description: Reference guide of configuration options for running Apollo MCP Server.
redirectFrom:
  - /apollo-mcp-server/command-reference
---

### Example config file

The following example file sets your endpoint to `localhost:4001`, configures transport over Streamable HTTP, provides a GraphOS key and graph reference,
enables introspection, and provides two local MCP operations for the server to expose.

```yaml config.yaml
endpoint: http://localhost:4001/
transport:
  type: streamable_http
graphos:
  apollo_key: <YOUR_APOLLO_KEY>
  apollo_graph_ref: <YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF>
introspection:
  introspect:
    enabled: true
operations:
  source: local
  paths:
    - relative/path/to/your/operations/userDetails.graphql
    - relative/path/to/your/operations/listing.graphql
```

## Configuration options

All fields are optional.

| Option           | Type                  | Default                  | Description                                                      |
| :--------------- | :-------------------- | :----------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `custom_scalars` | `FilePath`            |                          | Path to a [custom scalar map](/apollo-mcp-server/custom-scalars) |
| `endpoint`       | `URL`                 | `http://localhost:4000/` | The target GraphQL endpoint                                      |
| `graphos`        | `GraphOS`             |                          | Apollo-specific credential overrides                             |
| `headers`        | `Map<string, string>` | `{}`                     | List of hard-coded headers to include in all GraphQL requests    |
| `health_check`   | `HealthCheck`         |                          | Health check configuration                                       |
| `introspection`  | `Introspection`       |                          | Introspection configuration                                      |
| `logging`        | `Logging`             |                          | Logging configuration                                            |
| `operations`     | `OperationSource`     |                          | Operations configuration                                         |
| `overrides`      | `Overrides`           |                          | Overrides for server behavior                                    |
| `schema`         | `SchemaSource`        |                          | Schema configuration                                             |
| `transport`      | `Transport`           |                          | The type of server transport to use                              |

### GraphOS

These fields are under the top-level `graphos` key and define your GraphOS graph credentials and endpoints.

| Option                    | Type     | Default | Description                                                                                                     |
| :------------------------ | :------- | :------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `apollo_key`              | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS key. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_KEY` environment variable                    |
| `apollo_graph_ref`        | `string` |         | The Apollo GraphOS graph reference. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` environment variable  |
| `apollo_registry_url`     | `URL`    |         | The URL to use for Apollo's registry                                                                            |
| `apollo_uplink_endpoints` | `URL`    |         | List of uplink URL overrides. You can also provide this with the `APOLLO_UPLINK_ENDPOINTS` environment variable |

### Health checks

These fields are under the top-level `health_check` key.

| Option                        | Type       | Default     | Description                                                                        |
| :---------------------------- | :--------- | :---------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `enabled`                     | `bool`     | `false`     | Enable health check endpoints                                                      |
| `path`                        | `string`   | `"/health"` | Custom health check endpoint path                                                  |
| `readiness`                   | `object`   |             | Readiness check configuration                                                      |
| `readiness.allowed`           | `number`   | `100`       | Maximum number of rejections allowed in a sampling interval before marking unready |
| `readiness.interval`          | `object`   |             | Readiness check interval configuration                                             |
| `readiness.interval.sampling` | `duration` | `"5s"`      | How often to check the rejection count                                             |
| `readiness.interval.unready`  | `duration` | `"10s"`     | How long to wait before recovering from unready state (default: 2 \* sampling)     |

<Note>

Health checks are only available when using the `streamable_http` transport. The health check feature is inspired by Apollo Router's health check implementation.

</Note>

### Introspection

These fields are under the top-level `introspection` key. Learn more about the MCP [introspection tools](/apollo-mcp-server/define-tools#introspection-tools).

| Option                      | Type     | Default    | Description                                                           |
| :-------------------------- | :------- | :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `execute`                   | `object` |            | Execution configuration for introspection                             |
| `execute.enabled`           | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable introspection for execution                                    |
| `introspect`                | `object` |            | Introspection configuration for allowing clients to run introspection |
| `introspect.enabled`        | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable introspection requests                                         |
| `introspect.minify`         | `bool`   | `false`    | Minify introspection results to reduce context window usage           |
| `search`                    | `object` |            | Search tool configuration                                             |
| `search.enabled`            | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable search tool                                                    |
| `search.index_memory_bytes` | `number` | `50000000` | Amount of memory used for indexing (in bytes)                         |
| `search.leaf_depth`         | `number` | `1`        | Depth of subtype information to include from matching types           |
| `search.minify`             | `bool`   | `false`    | Minify search results to reduce context window usage                  |
| `validate`                  | `object` |            | Validation tool configuration                                         |
| `validate.enabled`          | `bool`   | `false`    | Enable validation tool                                                |

### Logging

These fields are under the top-level `logging` key.

| Option     | Type                                                | Default    | Description                                                                       |
| :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------- | :--------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `level`    | `oneOf ["trace", "debug", "info", "warn", "error"]` | `"info"`   | The minimum log level to record                                                   |
| `path`     | `FilePath`                                          |            | An output file path for logging. If not provided logging outputs to stdio/stderr. |
| `rotation` | `oneOf ["minutely", "hourly", "daily", "never"]`    | `"hourly"` | The log file rotation interval (if file logging is used)                          |

### Operation source

These fields are under the top-level `operations` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"infer"`.

| Source             | Option   | Type             | Default | Description                                                                                                                                             |
| :----------------- | :------- | :--------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| GraphOS Collection | `source` | `"collection"`   |         | Load operations from a GraphOS collection                                                                                                               |
| GraphOS Collection | `id`     | `string`         |         | The collection ID to use in GraphOS. Use `default` for the default collection. [Learn more](/apollo-mcp-server/define-tools/#from-operation-collection) |
| Introspection      | `source` | `"introspect"`   |         | Load operations by introspecting the schema. Note: You must enable introspection to use this source                                                     |
| Local              | `source` | `"local"`        |         | Load operations from local GraphQL files or directories                                                                                                 |
| Local              | `paths`  | `List<FilePath>` |         | Paths to GraphQL files or directories to search. Note: These paths are relative to the location from which you are running Apollo MCP Server.           |
| Manifest           | `source` | `"manifest"`     |         | Load operations from a persisted queries manifest file                                                                                                  |
| Manifest           | `path`   | `FilePath`       |         | The path to the persisted query manifest                                                                                                                |
| Uplink             | `source` | `"uplink"`       |         | Load operations from an uplink manifest. Note: This source requires an Apollo key and graph reference                                                   |
| Infer              | `source` | `"infer"`        | \*      | Infer where to load operations based on other configuration options.                                                                                    |

### Overrides

These fields are under the top-level `overrides` key.

| Option                       | Type                                | Default  | Description                                                                                                                      |
| :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------- | :------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `disable_type_description`   | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable type descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                        |
| `disable_schema_description` | `bool`                              | `false`  | Disable schema descriptions to save on context-window space                                                                      |
| `enable_explorer`            | `bool`                              | `false`  | Expose a tool that returns the URL to open a GraphQL operation in Apollo Explorer. Note: This requires a GraphOS graph reference |
| `mutation_mode`              | `oneOf ["none", "explicit", "all"]` | `"none"` | Defines the mutation access level for the MCP server                                                                             |

### Schema source

These fields are under the top-level `schema` key. The available fields depend on the value of the nested `source` key.
The default value for `source` is `"uplink"`.

| Source | Option   | Type       | Default | Description                                                                         |
| :----- | :------- | :--------- | :------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Local  | `source` | `"local"`  |         | Load schema from local file                                                         |
| Local  | `path`   | `FilePath` |         | Path to the GraphQL schema                                                          |
| Uplink | `source` | `"uplink"` | \*      | Fetch the schema from uplink. Note: This requires an Apollo key and graph reference |

### Transport

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key, to configure running the MCP Server in different environments - stdio, Streamable HTTP or SSE (deprecated).

```
transport:
  type: stdio
```

The available fields depend on the value of the nested `type` key:

##### stdio (default)

| Option | Value     | Default Value | Description                                                     |
| :----- | :-------- | :------------ | :-------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type` | `"stdio"` | \*            | Use standard IO for communication between the server and client |

##### Streamable HTTP

| Option    | Value                 | Value Type | Description                                                               |
| :-------- | :-------------------- | :--------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `type`    | `"streamable_http"`   |            | Host the MCP server on the configuration, using streamable HTTP messages. |
| `address` | `127.0.0.1` (default) | `IpAddr`   | The IP address to bind to                                                 |
| `port`    | `5000` (default)      | `u16`      | The port to bind to                                                       |

##### SSE (Deprecated, use StreamableHTTP)

| Option    | Value                 | Value Type | Description                                                                                                      |
| :-------- | :-------------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `type`    | `"sse"`               |            | Host the MCP server on the supplied config, using SSE for communication. Deprecated in favor of `StreamableHTTP` |
| `address` | `127.0.0.1` (default) | `IpAddr`   | The IP address to bind to                                                                                        |
| `port`    | `5000` (default)      | `u16`      | The port to bind to                                                                                              |

### Auth

These fields are under the top-level `transport` key, nested under the `auth` key.

| Option                   | Type           | Default | Description                                                                                        |
| :----------------------- | :------------- | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `servers`                | `List<URL>`    |         | List of upstream delegated OAuth servers (must support OIDC metadata discovery endpoint)           |
| `audiences`              | `List<string>` |         | List of accepted audiences from upstream signed JWTs                                               |
| `resource`               | `string`       |         | The externally available URL pointing to this MCP server. Can be `localhost` when testing locally. |
| `resource_documentation` | `string`       |         | Optional link to more documentation relating to this MCP server                                    |
| `scopes`                 | `List<string>` |         | List of queryable OAuth scopes from the upstream OAuth servers                                     |

Below is an example configuration using `StreamableHTTP` transport with authentication:

```yaml title="mcp.yaml"
transport:
  type: streamable_http
  auth:
    # List of upstream delegated OAuth servers
    # Note: These need to support the OIDC metadata discovery endpoint
    servers:
      - https://auth.example.com

    # List of accepted audiences from upstream signed JWTs
    # See: https://www.ory.sh/docs/hydra/guides/audiences
    audiences:
      - mcp.example.audience

    # The externally available URL pointing to this MCP server. Can be `localhost`
    # when testing locally.
    # Note: Subpaths must be preserved here as well. So append `/mcp` if using
    # Streamable HTTP or `/sse` is using SSE.
    resource: https://hosted.mcp.server/mcp

    # Optional link to more documentation relating to this MCP server.
    resource_documentation: https://info.mcp.server

    # List of queryable OAuth scopes from the upstream OAuth servers
    scopes:
      - read
      - mcp
      - profile
```
