docs/source/guides/auth.mdx, before:

---
title: Authorization with Apollo MCP Server
---

<PlanRequired plans={["Developer", "Standard", "Enterprise"]}/>

The Apollo MCP server supports authorizing clients (e.g., LLMs) in accordance with [the MCP specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization).

## Implement authorization with Apollo MCP Server

To implement authorization, you need an [OAuth 2.1-compliant](https://oauth.net/2.1/) Identity Provider (for example, your own in-house IdP or a third-party IdP such as Auth0, Okta, or Keycloak). You need the following values from your IdP:

- **URL**: The base URL of your Identity Provider, which is used to validate the JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) issued by it.
- **Audience**: Identifies the intended recipient of the token, typically a resource server or API. Represented by the `aud` claim in the JWT.
- **Scopes**: The scopes that the client will request. These scopes define the permissions granted to the client when it accesses the API.

Then, you [configure the MCP server with `auth` settings](/apollo-mcp-server/command-reference#auth) and the [GraphOS Router for JWT authentication](/graphos/routing/security/jwt) using those IdP values.

## Example: Auth0

This guide uses [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) as the Identity Provider.

### Pre-requisites

1. [Create an Apollo account](https://studio.apollographql.com/signup?referrer=docs-content).

    <PlanRequired plans={["Developer", "Standard", "Enterprise"]} />

1. Clone the repo for the example project.

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false
    git clone git@github.com:apollographql/apollo-mcp-server.git
    ```

1. Install or update the Rover CLI. You need at least v0.35 or later.

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false
    curl -sSL https://rover.apollo.dev/download/latest | sh
    ```

### Step 1: Set up the Auth0 Identity Provider

[Create an Auth0 account](https://auth0.com/).

#### Create the Auth0 API

1. In your dashboard, navigate to **Applications** -> **APIs**. 
1. Click **Create API**.
1. Give it a friendly name like `MCP Auth API`.
1. For the **Identifier** field, Auth0 recommends using a URL. This identifier is used in the MCP server configuration later as the `audience` property. For this guide, use `http://localhost:5000/mcp-example`.
1. Leave the defaults for the rest of the fields and click **Create**.
1. Navigate to your dashboard **Settings**.
    1. Under **General** -> **API Authorization Settings**, set the **Default Audience** to the `Identifier` you chose.
    1. Navigate to the **Advanced** tab.
    1. Toggle on **OIDC Dynamic Application Registration** to enable [dynamic client registration](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/applications/dynamic-client-registration#enable-dynamic-client-registration).
    1. Toggle on **Enable Application Connections**.
    1. Save your changes.

#### Create the Auth0 Connection

The Auth0 Connection is the method clients use to authenticate. This guide uses the default **Username-Password-Authentication** connection. 

1. In your dashboard, navigate to **Authentication** -> **Database**.
1. Create the default **Username-Password-Authentication** connection. Click the **Try Connection** button to test it.
1. Copy the **Connection Identifier** at the top of the page, you need it for the next step. It should start with something like `con_`.
1. Navigate to **Applications** -> **APIs** -> **Auth0 Management API**.
1. Click the **API Explorer** tab. Copy the token value, you also need it for the next step.
1. Run the following `curl` command to promote the connection to domain-level, replacing `CONNECTION_ID` and `MGMT_API_ACCESS_TOKEN` with the values you copied in the previous steps:

    ```sh
    curl --request PATCH \
      --url 'https://dev-p7nxaluy3f2ss4js.us.auth0.com/api/v2/connections/CONNECTION_ID' \
      --header 'authorization: Bearer MGMT_API_ACCESS_TOKEN' \
      --header 'cache-control: no-cache' \
      --header 'content-type: application/json' \
      --data '{ "is_domain_connection": true }'
    ```

Your Auth0 setup is now complete. You have an API with an audience and a connection for authentication.

### Step 2: Configure the MCP Server for authorization

Configure the MCP server to use the Auth0 instance for authentication.

1. Open the example repo you cloned earlier.
1. In the `graphql/TheSpaceDevs` directory, open the `config.yaml` file.
1. Add the following `auth` configuration under the `transport` key:

    ```yaml title="graphql/TheSpaceDevs/config.yaml"
    transport:
      type: streamable_http

      auth:
        servers:
          - https://<AUTH0 DOMAIN> # Fill in your Auth0 domain
        audiences:
          - <AUTH0 DEFAULT AUDIENCE> # Fill in your Auth0 Identifier
        resource: http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp
        scopes:
          - read:users # Adjust scopes as needed
    ```

1. Replace the `<AUTH0 DOMAIN>` with your own Auth0 domain. It should look something like `dev-123456.us.auth0.com`, where `dev-123456` is your Auth0 tenant ID.

1. Replace the `<AUTH0 DEFAULT AUDIENCE>` with the matching `Identifier` you set when creating the Auth0 API. In this guide, you used `http://localhost:5000/mcp-example`.

Your MCP server is now configured to use Auth0 for authentication.

### Step 3: Configure the router for JWT authentication

Configure your GraphOS Router to validate JWTs issued by Auth0. This involves setting up the JWKS endpoint and defining the authorization rules.

#### Define authorization and authentication rules in the router

1. In the `graphql/TheSpaceDevs` directory, create a new file called `router.yaml`.
1. Paste the following configuration, replacing `<AUTH0 DOMAIN>` with your Auth0 domain:

    ```yaml title="graphql/TheSpaceDevs/router.yaml"
    authorization:
      require_authentication: true # Enforces authentication on all requests
    authentication:
      router:
        jwt:
          jwks:
            - url: https://<AUTH0 DOMAIN>/.well-known/jwks.json
    homepage:
      enabled: false
    sandbox:
      enabled: true
    supergraph:
      introspection: true
    ```

    With this configuration, the router requires authentication for all requests. If a request doesn't include an Authorization token, the router returns an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error. 

#### Retrieve your GraphOS license credentials for auth

You need a graph's credentials and a valid GraphOS plan to use the router's authentication features.

1. Navigate to [GraphOS Studio](https://studio.apollographql.com/) and log in.
1. Click **Add graph** and **Connect an existing graph**.
1. Give it a name and click **Next**.
1. In the next modal, find the command that looks something like this:

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false {2}
    APOLLO_KEY=<YOUR_APOLLO_KEY> \
    rover subgraph publish <YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF> \
    --schema ./products-schema.graphql \
    --name your-subgraph-name \
    --routing-url http://products.prod.svc.cluster.local:4001/graphql
    ```

    Note: You don't need to run this command.

1. Retrieve the values for `YOUR_APOLLO_KEY` and `YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF`.

#### Run the MCP Server and router

1. Back in your terminal, in the root of the project directory, replace and run the following command to start the MCP Server and the router together:

    ```sh
    APOLLO_GRAPH_REF=<YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF> APOLLO_KEY=<YOUR_APOLLO_KEY> \
    rover dev --supergraph-config ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/supergraph.yaml \
    --router-config ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/router.yaml \
    --mcp ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/config.yaml
    ```

1. Test the router by navigating to `http://localhost:4000` in your browser. You should see the Explorer, where you can run GraphQL queries against the router.

1. Remember, the router is configured to require authentication on all requests. Any operations without a valid Authorization token returns an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error. Run the operation: 

    ```graphql
    query GetAstronautsCurrentlyInSpace {
      astronauts(filters: { inSpace: true, search: "" }) {
        results {
          id
          name
          timeInSpace
          lastFlight
        }
      }
    }
    ```

1. You should see an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error, which means the router is correctly enforcing authentication.

### Step 4: Make requests with MCP Inspector

1. In a new terminal window, run the MCP Inspector:

    ```sh
    npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector
    ```

    The browser should open automatically with a proxy auth token.

1. In the MCP Inspector, select `Streamable HTTP` as the Transport Type and enter `http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp` as the URL.
1. Click **Connect**. This triggers the OAuth flow, and you are redirected to the Auth0 login page.
1. Log in with the credentials you set up in the Auth0 connection and allow MCP Inspector access.
1. After you connect, the browser redirects back to MCP Inspector.
1. Click **List Tools** to see the available tools.
1. Select the `GetAstronautsCurrentlyInSpace` tool listed and click **Run Tool**.
1. You should see the results of the query, which means the authentication is working correctly.

You can select the **Auth** tab in MCP Inspector to see the details of the authenticated user and the scopes granted.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### MCP Server Won't Start
- **Error**: "Port 5000 is already in use"
  - Solution: Kill any existing processes using port 5000 or specify a different port with the `transport.port` option or `APOLLO_MCP_TRANSPORT__PORT` env variable
- **Error**: "Failed to load supergraph configuration"
  - Solution: Verify you're running the command from the repo root directory
  - Solution: Check that the path to `supergraph.yaml` is correct
- **Error**: "License violation"
  - Solution: Ensure that the `rover dev` command includes valid `APOLLO_KEY` and `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` values and that your plan supports authentication features.
- **Error**: "What URL is your subgraph running on?" question in terminal
  - Solution: Verify that the file path for your config files is correct. You should run the `rover dev` command from the root of the example project directory and the file paths should be relative to that root.

#### MCP Inspector Connection Issues
- **Error**: "Failed to connect to server"
  - Solution: Ensure the MCP server is running (check terminal output)
  - Solution: Verify you're using the correct URL (`http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp`)
  - Solution: Check if your firewall is blocking the connection

### Infinite loop during OAuth flow
- **Issue**: After logging in to Auth0, MCP Inspector keeps refreshing and doesn't complete the OAuth flow
  - Solution: In MCP Inspector, open the **Authentication** panel in the sidebar. Clear out any values in the **Header Name** and **Bearer Token** fields. Then try connecting again.
  - Solution: In MCP Inspector, select **Clear OAuth State** and try connecting again.

### Getting Help

If you're still having issues:
1. Check the [Apollo MCP Server GitHub issues](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server/issues)
2. Join the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41)
3. Contact your Apollo representative for direct support

## Next Steps

When you are ready, [deploy the MCP server](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#deploying-the-mcp-server).

Commit message:

add guided auth flow alternate steps

docs/source/guides/auth.mdx, after:

---
title: Authorization with Apollo MCP Server
---

<PlanRequired plans={["Developer", "Standard", "Enterprise"]}/>

The Apollo MCP server supports authorizing clients (e.g., LLMs) in accordance with [the MCP specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization).

## Implement authorization with Apollo MCP Server

To implement authorization, you need an [OAuth 2.1-compliant](https://oauth.net/2.1/) Identity Provider (for example, your own in-house IdP or a third-party IdP such as Auth0, Okta, or Keycloak). You need the following values from your IdP:

- **URL**: The base URL of your Identity Provider, which is used to validate the JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) issued by it.
- **Audience**: Identifies the intended recipient of the token, typically a resource server or API. Represented by the `aud` claim in the JWT.
- **Scopes**: The scopes that the client will request. These scopes define the permissions granted to the client when it accesses the API.

Then, you [configure the MCP server with `auth` settings](/apollo-mcp-server/command-reference#auth) and the [GraphOS Router for JWT authentication](/graphos/routing/security/jwt) using those IdP values.

## Example: Auth0

This guide uses [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) as the Identity Provider.

### Pre-requisites

1. [Create an Apollo account](https://studio.apollographql.com/signup?referrer=docs-content).

    <PlanRequired plans={["Developer", "Standard", "Enterprise"]} />

1. Clone the repo for the example project.

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false
    git clone git@github.com:apollographql/apollo-mcp-server.git
    ```

1. Install or update the Rover CLI. You need at least v0.35 or later.

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false
    curl -sSL https://rover.apollo.dev/download/latest | sh
    ```

### Step 1: Set up the Auth0 Identity Provider

[Create an Auth0 account](https://auth0.com/).

#### Create the Auth0 API

1. In your dashboard, navigate to **Applications** -> **APIs**. 
1. Click **Create API**.
1. Give it a friendly name like `MCP Auth API`.
1. For the **Identifier** field, Auth0 recommends using a URL. This identifier is used in the MCP server configuration later as the `audience` property. For this guide, use `http://localhost:5000/mcp-example`.
1. Leave the defaults for the rest of the fields and click **Create**.
1. Navigate to your dashboard **Settings**.
    1. Under **General** -> **API Authorization Settings**, set the **Default Audience** to the `Identifier` you chose.
    1. Navigate to the **Advanced** tab.
    1. Toggle on **OIDC Dynamic Application Registration** to enable [dynamic client registration](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/applications/dynamic-client-registration#enable-dynamic-client-registration).
    1. Toggle on **Enable Application Connections**.
    1. Save your changes.

#### Create the Auth0 Connection

The Auth0 Connection is the method clients use to authenticate. This guide uses the default **Username-Password-Authentication** connection. 

1. In your dashboard, navigate to **Authentication** -> **Database**.
1. Create the default **Username-Password-Authentication** connection. Click the **Try Connection** button to test it.
1. Copy the **Connection Identifier** at the top of the page, you need it for the next step. It should start with something like `con_`.
1. Navigate to **Applications** -> **APIs** -> **Auth0 Management API**.
1. Click the **API Explorer** tab. Copy the token value, you also need it for the next step.
1. Run the following `curl` command to promote the connection to domain-level, replacing `CONNECTION_ID` and `MGMT_API_ACCESS_TOKEN` with the values you copied in the previous steps:

    ```sh
    curl --request PATCH \
      --url 'https://dev-p7nxaluy3f2ss4js.us.auth0.com/api/v2/connections/CONNECTION_ID' \
      --header 'authorization: Bearer MGMT_API_ACCESS_TOKEN' \
      --header 'cache-control: no-cache' \
      --header 'content-type: application/json' \
      --data '{ "is_domain_connection": true }'
    ```

Your Auth0 setup is now complete. You have an API with an audience and a connection for authentication.

### Step 2: Configure the MCP Server for authorization

Configure the MCP server to use the Auth0 instance for authentication.

1. Open the example repo you cloned earlier.
1. In the `graphql/TheSpaceDevs` directory, open the `config.yaml` file.
1. Add the following `auth` configuration under the `transport` key:

    ```yaml title="graphql/TheSpaceDevs/config.yaml"
    transport:
      type: streamable_http

      auth:
        servers:
          - https://<AUTH0 DOMAIN> # Fill in your Auth0 domain
        audiences:
          - <AUTH0 DEFAULT AUDIENCE> # Fill in your Auth0 Identifier
        resource: http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp
        scopes:
          - read:users # Adjust scopes as needed
    ```

1. Replace the `<AUTH0 DOMAIN>` with your own Auth0 domain. It should look something like `dev-123456.us.auth0.com`, where `dev-123456` is your Auth0 tenant ID.

1. Replace the `<AUTH0 DEFAULT AUDIENCE>` with the matching `Identifier` you set when creating the Auth0 API. In this guide, you used `http://localhost:5000/mcp-example`.

Your MCP server is now configured to use Auth0 for authentication.

### Step 3: Configure the router for JWT authentication

Configure your GraphOS Router to validate JWTs issued by Auth0. This involves setting up the JWKS endpoint and defining the authorization rules.

#### Define authorization and authentication rules in the router

1. In the `graphql/TheSpaceDevs` directory, create a new file called `router.yaml`.
1. Paste the following configuration, replacing `<AUTH0 DOMAIN>` with your Auth0 domain:

    ```yaml title="graphql/TheSpaceDevs/router.yaml"
    authorization:
      require_authentication: true # Enforces authentication on all requests
    authentication:
      router:
        jwt:
          jwks:
            - url: https://<AUTH0 DOMAIN>/.well-known/jwks.json
    homepage:
      enabled: false
    sandbox:
      enabled: true
    supergraph:
      introspection: true
    ```

    With this configuration, the router requires authentication for all requests. If a request doesn't include an Authorization token, the router returns an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error. 

#### Retrieve your GraphOS license credentials for auth

You need a graph's credentials and a valid GraphOS plan to use the router's authentication features.

1. Navigate to [GraphOS Studio](https://studio.apollographql.com/) and log in.
1. Click **Add graph** and **Connect an existing graph**.
1. Give it a name and click **Next**.
1. In the next modal, find the command that looks something like this:

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false {2}
    APOLLO_KEY=<YOUR_APOLLO_KEY> \
    rover subgraph publish <YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF> \
    --schema ./products-schema.graphql \
    --name your-subgraph-name \
    --routing-url http://products.prod.svc.cluster.local:4001/graphql
    ```

    Note: You don't need to run this command.

1. Retrieve the values for `YOUR_APOLLO_KEY` and `YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF`.

#### Run the MCP Server and router

1. Back in your terminal, in the root of the project directory, replace and run the following command to start the MCP Server and the router together:

    ```sh
    APOLLO_GRAPH_REF=<YOUR_APOLLO_GRAPH_REF> APOLLO_KEY=<YOUR_APOLLO_KEY> \
    rover dev --supergraph-config ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/supergraph.yaml \
    --router-config ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/router.yaml \
    --mcp ./graphql/TheSpaceDevs/config.yaml
    ```

1. Test the router by navigating to `http://localhost:4000` in your browser. You should see the Explorer, where you can run GraphQL queries against the router.

1. Remember, the router is configured to require authentication on all requests. Any operations without a valid Authorization token returns an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error. Run the operation: 

    ```graphql
    query GetAstronautsCurrentlyInSpace {
      astronauts(filters: { inSpace: true, search: "" }) {
        results {
          id
          name
          timeInSpace
          lastFlight
        }
      }
    }
    ```

1. You should see an `UNAUTHENTICATED` error, which means the router is correctly enforcing authentication.

### Step 4: Make requests with MCP Inspector

1. In a new terminal window, run the MCP Inspector:

    ```sh
    npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector
    ```

    The browser should open automatically with a proxy auth token.

1. In the MCP Inspector, select `Streamable HTTP` as the Transport Type and enter `http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp` as the URL.
1. Click **Connect**. This triggers the OAuth flow, and you are redirected to the Auth0 login page.
1. Log in with the credentials you set up in the Auth0 connection and allow MCP Inspector access.
1. After you connect, the browser redirects back to MCP Inspector.
1. Click **List Tools** to see the available tools.
1. Select the `GetAstronautsCurrentlyInSpace` tool listed and click **Run Tool**.
1. You should see the results of the query, which means the authentication is working correctly.

You can select the **Auth** tab in MCP Inspector to see the details of the authenticated user and the scopes granted.

<ExpansionPanel title="Alternative: Guided OAuth flow in MCP Inspector">

You can also use the guided OAuth flow in MCP Inspector to test authentication. This gives you a detailed look into each step the client does to connect to the server.

1. Click **Open Auth Settings**.
1. In the **OAuth Flow Progress** section, click **Continue** to start the **Metadata Discovery** step.
1. Click **Continue** to start the **Client Registration** step. Expand the **Registered Client Information** step to note the `client_id` value.
1. Click **Continue** to start the **Preparing Authorization** step. Click the link to open up a new tab to authorize MCP Inspector.
1. Copy the authorization code and return to MCP Inspector.
1. Paste the code in the next step **Request Authorization and acquire authorization code** then click **Continue**.
1. Click **Continue** to start the **Token Request** step. This completes the authentication flow.

Before continuing, you need to set up the Auth0 client to accept an additional callback URL.

1. In your Auth0 dashboard, navigate to **Applications**.
1. Select the client for **MCP Inspector**. If you have multiple entries, find the `client_id` value from the MCP Inspector.
1. In the client's **Settings** -> **Application URIs**, copy and paste the existing callback URL. Then, remove the `/debug` suffix. Make sure the URLs are comma-separated. It should look something like this:

    ```txt
    http://localhost:6274/oauth/callback/debug,
    http://localhost:6274/oauth/callback
    ```

1. Back in MCP Inspector, click **Connect**. You are now authenticated and can run tools as usual.

</ExpansionPanel>

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### MCP Server Won't Start
- **Error**: "Port 5000 is already in use"
  - Solution: Kill any existing processes using port 5000 or specify a different port with the `transport.port` option or `APOLLO_MCP_TRANSPORT__PORT` env variable
- **Error**: "Failed to load supergraph configuration"
  - Solution: Verify you're running the command from the repo root directory
  - Solution: Check that the path to `supergraph.yaml` is correct
- **Error**: "License violation"
  - Solution: Ensure that the `rover dev` command includes valid `APOLLO_KEY` and `APOLLO_GRAPH_REF` values and that your plan supports authentication features.
- **Error**: "What URL is your subgraph running on?" question in terminal
  - Solution: Verify that the file path for your config files is correct. You should run the `rover dev` command from the root of the example project directory and the file paths should be relative to that root.

#### MCP Inspector Connection Issues
- **Error**: "Failed to connect to server"
  - Solution: Ensure the MCP server is running (check terminal output)
  - Solution: Verify you're using the correct URL (`http://127.0.0.1:5000/mcp`)
  - Solution: Check if your firewall is blocking the connection

### Infinite loop during OAuth flow
- **Issue**: After logging in to Auth0, MCP Inspector keeps refreshing and doesn't complete the OAuth flow
  - Solution: In MCP Inspector, open the **Authentication** panel in the sidebar. Clear out any values in the **Header Name** and **Bearer Token** fields. Then try connecting again.
  - Solution: In MCP Inspector, select **Clear OAuth State** and try connecting again.

### Getting Help

If you're still having issues:
1. Check the [Apollo MCP Server GitHub issues](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-mcp-server/issues)
2. Join the [Apollo Community MCP Server Category](https://community.apollographql.com/c/mcp-server/41)
3. Contact your Apollo representative for direct support

## Next Steps

When you are ready, [deploy the MCP server](/apollo-mcp-server/guides#deploying-the-mcp-server).
